---
path: '/en/paddles/definitive-guide'
title: 'The Definitive Guide to Paddles'
---

The paddle - aside from the paddler - is THE essential element in stand up
paddling. It is easy to fall in love with board designs, shapes and sizes.
However, I would encourage all of you to prioritize the selection of a
well-designed paddle that fits your body type and activity (surfing, racing or
cruising) over getting the coolest board any day.

Not only is the paddle essential to your performance, but also injury and
longevity need to be considered. Poorly designed paddles or excessively long
paddles can do some real damage long term.

In addition, it is fair to say that carbon fiber paddles offer the perfect mix
of low weight, performance and flex to make paddling enjoyable. And they are by
far the most expensive.

Finally, a fixed-length paddle cut exactly to your size and purpose just feels
the best, it is smooth, it has balanced flex throughout the entire shaft, it
avoids give between connected parts and minimizes the need for maintenance.

I would say roughly 80% of your enjoyment of SUPing comes from how your paddle
feels in your hand and how it transfers your energy into forward momentum on the
water. Make this your priority in terms of budget and depth of analysis.

## Choosing the 'right' Paddle

Ultimately you'll want to know is what paddle to choose. If you want to jump
ahead and do so consult our
[Choosing the Right Paddle Guide](/en/paddles/choosing-the-right-one).

Here below we will set the foundational understanding on the fundamentals of
shapes, sizes and material of **shafts** and **blades** and the associated
general characteristics.

## The Shaft

### Materials

Note: Some manufacturers use fiberglass on the inside of the shaft and coat it
in carbon fiber for marketing purposes. However, this is usually reflected in
the price and easily detected by the weight.

### Flex

Stiffness S40 (Starboard)

#### Oval / Round

Oval -> stiffer, Round -> more flex

### Thickness

### Tapered / Not Tapered

### Fixed vs. Adjustable vs. Travel

Generally, fixed paddles maximize performance, don’t take on water and are
generally maintenance-free, whereas adjustable paddles maximize the ability to
accommodate varying heights but sacrifice performance, can take on water and
sink, and require regular cleaning and maintenance.

## The Blade

### Shape

#### Surface

<img src="https://www.rei.com/dam/van_dragt_091317_0037_sup_paddle_blade_shapes.jpg" alt="image" style="width:200px;"/>

##### Teardrop

##### Rectangular

#### Tip

##### Flat

##### Rounded

<img src="https://340407-1049705-raikfcquaxqncofqfm.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Starboard-SUP-Stand-Up-Paddleboard-Paddle-Key-Features-2020-lima-ltd-blade.jpg" alt="image" style="width:60%;"/>

Smoother entry and exit of the paddle stroke. Simple and easy to use offering
lots of stability in the water, which makes it a great feature for both
beginners and advanced paddlers (e.g. Starboard's "Lima" line).

This makes it a great choice if you are paddling at a high cadence. It takes
tremendous skill to maintain perfect technique and a clean catch during faster
strokes. That is why the forgiving nature of a rounded tip is helpful here -
especially if combined with a more rectangular shape of the blade.

Generally this shape is optimised for use in flatwater rather than in the surf.

#### Curve

#### Surface

##### Di-hedral

##### Double Concave

### Offset

Offset describes the degree that the blade angles forward from the shaft. The
size of that angle affects how vertical the blade is when it travels through the
water, which in turn can affect how much power you get out of each stroke.

You don’t need to spend much time scrutinizing offset angles unless you enjoy
analyzing the finer details of your gear. That being said, here are some general
offset recommendations based on different styles of paddling:

For SUP surfing: approximately 7 degrees

For all-around paddling/mixed use: approximately 10 degrees

For SUP racing: approximately 12 degrees

### Size

Reactangular bottom design is usually applied in smaller paddle blades which

### Core

Core materials can vary in quality which is typically expressed in it's weight.
Common materials are PVC and PU foam.

### Topics to consider

- Flex (Materials: Aluminium, Fiberglass, Carbon Fiber)

- Blade Size -> Cadence

- Shaft length (round / oval | tapered or not)

- Hand Position in relation to arm length
