---
path: '/en/technique/paddling'
title: 'Paddling'
---

Hand position: Beginners sometimes hold the paddle with their hands too close
together, limiting the amount of power they can get out of each stroke. Here’s a
simple way to figure out where to put your hands: Grab the T-grip on the end of
the paddle with one hand and the shaft of the paddle with your other hand. Raise
the paddle above your head so it is in line with your shoulders and rest the
shaft on your head. While still holding the T-grip with one hand, position your
other hand on the shaft so that both arms form 90-degree angles at the elbows.
This is where you want your hands positioned on the paddle while paddling. It’s
helpful to mark the spot on the shaft with a piece of colorful tape so you can
quickly grab the paddle in the right place. When you’re using the paddle, don’t
over-grip it. A light grasp on the T-grip and shaft is all you need.

## Stroke Phases

### Catch

Most experts will agree on this point: getting a clean catch is arguably the
most most important part of the stoke. The idea is to reach forward and fully
insert the blade by slicing it into the water from the side and/or straight down
before applying power to the blade. If you start pulling before the blade is
fully submerged, turbulence from the blade edges create air pockets that get
pulled down and create slippage, reducing the efficiency and effectiveness of
the whole stroke.

### Pull

This is where you apply your skill, strength and explosiveness to generate
optimal forward momentum.

There are many ways to apply power to the stroke. Without getting into too much
detail, most beginners can start by pulling and pushing using only the arms. To
make the stroke more powerful and efficient, work on engaging the whole body by
using a torso twist and by pushing down with your top hand, using gravity to
lean your body weight into the stroke while pulling with only a slight bend in
your lower arm. Avoid pulling the paddle past the feet.

### Exit

Feathering the blade allows the paddle a smooth exit close to the rail and feet.
As you end the power phase, use a twisting motion of the top hand (pointing
thumb forward) to feather the power face of the blade away from the body as you
lift the paddle up with your bottom arm and start moving the blade forward into
the recovery.

### Recover

A clean exit makes the blade come out easily and move back into the reach
position quickly and almost effortlessly which gives you a chance to relax,
inhale and re-set the body for another clean stroke.

## Strokes

### Forward Stroke

### Reverse Stroke

### Sweep Stroke

### Draw Stroke

### J Stroke

### Cross-Bow Stroke

## Training Cues

A good way to check the efficiency of your stroke is to listen. On a calm, quiet
day, listen to your stroke. If there is a lot of splashing when you enter the
water, focus on getting a cleaner catch- slice the blade into the water smoothly
instead of splashing it down into the water. If there is a lot of gurgling
during the power phase, make sure to plant the whole blade and slow down the
blade movement. The speed of the blade should match the speed of the board
moving past the planted blade. If you are throwing water behind you or have a
splashy exit, focus on the feathering and getting a smooth, clean exit out of
the water. If you are executing a stroke correctly, the stroke should feel very
smooth, efficient, powerful and quiet.
